Debit debt is rather a forced state in which the enterprise is, only because it exists in specific conditions of the market.
It cannot but have a debit debt.
But it is not interested in it in excessive magnitude.
It is not interested in it at all.
But it cannot have it below the required magnitude for business to exist.
That is why it is interested in a decrease, but not below the minimum required magnitude.
But on the other hand, as we can see from this formula, the enterprise is extremely interested in increasing the creditors' interest.
Of course, living in business at someone else's expense is simply amazing.
Everyone is lending you money, and you are developing without even using your own money.
It would seem that this is an ideal dream.
But in fact, the use of creditors' interest again has its limits.
Firstly, you are being credited only because you are in the market conditions.
You are not being credited for charity.
You are being credited because if you are not given a credit, you will take it from another enterprise.
It is a competition.
That is why you are being credited.
But on the other hand, you are not being credited for charity.
That is why creditors' interest always exists in some limits.
On the other hand, creditors' interest is a debt that you have to pay back anyway.
That is why it is impossible to increase creditors' interest infinitely.
You have to pay it back.
Moreover, creditors' interest, as we know, has a hidden payment for these money.
You still get it for free.
It is just hidden in the price, but there is a payment for it.
On the other hand, creditors' interest has to be paid back.
It is determined by business ethics.
You are given it until you pay it back.
As soon as you refuse to pay it back, no one will give it to you.
Moreover, you will be demanded to pay it back.
By all the truths and untruths.
That is why creditors' interest is such a value that is within the business ethics.
You are given it, you pay it back, and all parties are satisfied with the normal business process.
The main thing is not to get lost in this optimal process and to be within it.
During the production itself, a number of factors influence the current financial needs.
First of all, it is the duration of the production and export cycle.
Imagine that the longer the production process, the more money is in the form of assets.
The longer the cycle, the more money.
And the longer the export cycle, the longer the company can't sell its products,
the more the products are kept in the warehouse.
All this requires additional financial resources, which are concentrated in this form.
That is why the duration of the production cycle and the duration of the household cycle are not indifferent to the businessman.
But if the duration of the export cycle depends on the production process itself,
and if you can't do it faster than the production process,
then the businessman can influence the rhythmicality of the production.
He shouldn't allow these failures.
The production process should be minimized in time.
Then the funds that will be frozen in the production process will be minimal.
The household cycle is also very important for the businessman.
On the one hand, the businessman is interested in selling the product as soon as possible.
Of course, why keep the product frozen if the market is ready to take it?
But the household cycle is also a very important part of the business.
If you don't have any ready-made products in the warehouse,
you have an opportunity to refuse a partner who would like to purchase the product.
He comes and says, I want to buy from you.
You say, no, we've sold everything, there's nothing.
He turns around and leaves to your competitor.
And you lose a partner who you could have used to produce a lot of your products.
And the next time you have a product, but there's no one to sell it to.
That's why you should have as many ready-made products in the warehouse
so that you don't have to say no to anyone.
And so that everyone who approached you for ready-made products,
would say with a smile, yes, we're happy to see you, we're ready to offer you our products.
Then the number of business partners who will purchase it from you will increase,
or at least not decrease, which is very important for the business.
That's why in the household cycle, a certain part of the goods,
a certain part of the finances are concentrated there,
and you can't get anywhere without it.
This is the market, this is the life of the business.
But the current financial needs are also influenced by the pace of production growth.
It has a very specific effect.
The higher the pace of production growth, the more you produce products,
the more you need to invest in the production of the household cycle,
providing these growth rates.
Moreover, you will also need the means,
but they are not reversible,
they are the main means that are aimed at the technical rearmament of your production.
In order to ensure faster growth of production,
you need to use more and more modern means of production.
Thus, if you want to have higher pace of growth,
if your business is expanding,
you need to invest more and more money in the production process,
in the household cycle,
which requires additional finances.
The seasonality of production is also influenced.
The thing is that modern business is in many ways seasonal.
The easiest example is agriculture.
The harvest is a seasonal factor.
The harvest is not planted and harvested every year.
The season is a year,
and during this year the harvest is planted,
the harvest is harvested,
it is stored, processed, and so on.
But not only agriculture.
There is also seasonality, which is related to the seasons.
The seasons are very dependent on the season.
In winter, construction work is much more difficult than in summer.
That's why builders always want to do construction work in summer.
Another thing is that it is not always possible.
As soon as spring and summer come,
the money ends.
Unfortunately, this is the practice.
When builders want to build, they have nothing to build.
And in winter, when everything is over,
money appears.
To avoid this, it is necessary to plan correctly.
In summer and spring, in autumn,
the largest amount of money is left,
and this is a seasonal factor to use in construction.
Probably, in other industries,
you can say the same,
but in construction,
the whole clothing is seasonal.
Seasonality also includes the production of clothing.
All clothing is seasonal.
There is clothing for summer, for winter.
Any company that produces clothing
is adjusted in such a way
to produce it for that season,
when it will be used as needed.
Seasonality leads to the fact
that the enterprise works unevenly for a year.
Not because it works badly,
but because of the production cycle.
Accordingly, with uneven work,
in different periods of the year,
the enterprise needs more or less
turnover for work.
The enterprise must adjust its turnover
to have enough turnover for the season.
Moreover, seasonality is not only in production,
but also in implementation.
For example, builders,
and those who buy apartments,
know that there is a season of buying apartments.
There is a period of vacations,
when the sale of a new apartment is frozen.
And after leaving the vacation,
the sale of a new apartment is activated.
And a significant number of apartments
are purchased.
Thus, the implementation of the enterprise
is not only in production,
but also in implementation.
In addition to the production of the enterprise,
there is also a supply.
The supply itself can have a production character,
but it is not a product.
And when the raw material is produced unevenly
all year round,
but only in certain periods,
it is necessary to buy it
and store it.
The enterprise is forced to buy
the raw material in season,
to have special capacity for storing it,
and to use it normally in the production process.
Thus, the enterprise has a break-through
of liquidity of financial resources.
And the enterprise must,
in advance,
foresee the break-through of liquidity,
and foresee the sources
through which
these break-throughs of liquidity will be covered.
The state of the industry
also affects the current financial needs.
Our enterprise, which we are considering,
is not located on a residential island.
It is surrounded by the same enterprises
as the industry,
its competitors,
which, in turn,
try to seize the market share
and track the competitors.
And not to lose to them in the competition.
Lack of turnover
leads to the fact that the enterprise
is out of competition.
The competitors have turnover
and can offer the product to the consumer.
And if we do not have this money
and we will not be able to normalize the product
the state of the competitive environment
and the state of the industry
plays a very important role.
The industry is not only a competitive environment.
It is also what we produce,
what is popular as a commodity.
There are fashionable goods.
If we do not monitor the state of the market,
the state of fashion,
the state of the production,
it may turn out that soon
this product will not be needed.
It will simply cease to be in demand.
The enterprise must monitor the state of the market,
the needs of the market
and adjust in time to produce only the product
that the market needs.
In addition to the above factors,
the enterprise must also
meet the requirements of the added value standard.
The enterprise must meet the requirements
of the added value standard.
It is clear that each enterprise
would like to earn as much as possible
and have as much as possible
of the added value standard.
But there are two ends of the stick.
The enterprise should try to sell the goods
at the highest price possible.
At the same cost,
this, of course, provides a high standard
of the added value.
But a higher price for the goods
that the enterprise produces
requires additional actions from the enterprise.
First, it is not enough to increase the price
of the goods.
One of the options is to move to a state of monopoly.
If you are a monopolist,
then you increase the price
and it is easier to implement it.
If you are a monopolist
and you have three to five main competitors,
you have to enter into a conspiracy
to become a monopolist through a conspiracy
and to achieve a higher standard of the added value.
But the elasticity of the goods
also plays a role here.
Remember our first lecture
where we talked about the elasticity of the goods?
If the goods are not elastic,
for example, salt,
then the price increase
does not affect the ability to implement the goods.
You sell the same amount of goods as before,
but at a higher price.
And the standard of the added value increases
and the enterprise feels euphoria
from getting additional profit.
But if your goods are elastic
and more and more high-elastic,
then the price increase is not a good condition.
The thing is that if you are not a monopolist
and you are in a state of conspiracy,
then the price increase leads to the fact
that the consumers stop buying the goods
and start buying the goods from your competitors
who did not raise the price.
The sale of elastic goods
in order to get more profit,
as you remember,
should not increase the price,
but should decrease the price.
When we talk about the standard of the added value,
we are talking about the price increase.
The price increase is good for non-elastic goods
or for elastic goods
that are still produced by monopolists
or monopolists.
Then, due to these economic forms,
the goods become non-elastic
and the price increases.
And if you are not a very large enterprise
and you cannot be a monopolist or a monopolist,
but you are in a competitive environment,
you need to remember
that the price increase
is not the only way
to get profit from the business.
You can get profit from the business
by reducing the price,
reducing the standard of the added value,
but increasing the volume of the produced goods.
And the total profit you get
from the production of the standard of the added value
for the number of produced goods will increase.
So, if you are not an oligopolist
and not a monopolist,
do not despair.
You can reduce the price
and then you will live perfectly
without increasing the price.
For the coverage of the current financial needs
that we have just talked about,
enterprises need financial resources.
Where do enterprises get the financial resources
to realize their needs?
We have already said that the best is their own financial resources.
But if they are not enough,
and if they do not have enough credit
that is generated by the business partners
to provide them with the goods,
then the enterprise, as we remember,
turns to the financial market
and gets the financial resources
from the market
in the form of a loan or a bank loan.
I repeat,
a loan is the obtaining of financial resources
from the same business partners as you,
and a loan is the obtaining of financial resources
from the banks.
We have already talked about this,
but we have repeated it again.
So, a loan or a bank loan
is a way to cover the current financial needs.
We are talking about short-term financial needs,
so we are talking about short-term loans
or short-term bank loans.
In addition to these,
there is an opportunity to issue a VEXEL.
And these enterprises often use it.
VEXEL is a very convenient form of short-term financing.
The thing is that you issue VEXEL yourself.
You do not have to go to any financial institution
to issue a VEXEL.
There is a law that regulates the content of VEXEL,
which should be indicated in VEXEL.
The form of VEXEL is determined by you,
so that you can write VEXEL
on a clean piece of paper.
Only if everything that is written in VEXEL
meets the requirements of the law.
It is easy to issue a VEXEL,
but the most important thing in VEXEL is that it is accepted.
When instead of money you are allowed to take VEXEL,
you are using the reputation of a reliable business partner.
You are trusted and instead of money you are allowed to take VEXEL.
VEXEL is an urgent payment
that you promise to return
after some time,
which is described in VEXEL.
You will be returned VEXEL,
and you will be returned money
with the interest rate that is described in VEXEL.
If you are a reliable business partner,
if you are trusted,
then they will agree to take your VEXEL.
If you are not reliable in business,
then you will not be able to use
such a form of attracting financial funds
as issuing VEXELs.
In addition to VEXELs,
you can use factoring.
This is a new form of financing,
a new one in the Russian market.
It does not mean that it is never used in the world.
Factoring has been known for a long time in the world,
and it is used in all countries,
but in the Russian market it is a young form.
And in terms of time,
not all enterprises that are even
worthy of using factoring, use it.
Moreover, not everyone knows about factoring,
so when we talk about it now,
it is very important,
because factoring has a serious future.
What is factoring?
I must say, so that you can clearly imagine
when to turn to it.
Factoring is used by production enterprises,
which produce the product
and then transfer it to the consumer
in the form of a commodity loan.
But the enterprise cannot expand the commodity loan
to infinity,
because it has a fixed limited amount of money.
It can give a commodity loan
no more than it can give,
and then it will stop.
And if it wants to expand its production,
it needs to increase the quantity of the commodity
that is provided in the form of a commodity loan.
It needs money for that.
And if all the lighter forms
that we have been talking about today are already used,
and they cannot be used anymore,
then we should remember about factoring.
Factoring is not a loan.
It is not provided by banks,
although banks sometimes participate in it,
but by special factoring companies
that are created with banks
and provide factoring services.
The essence of factoring services is that
the production enterprise unloads the commodity,
provides a commodity loan,
and the factory company
transfers the documents of the commodity unloading.
And the factory company exchanges
the debt that the enterprise has
for the money
that is needed to cover the debt.
Thus, the enterprise,
in fact,
gets the money
that it can use for further production.
And it does not need to wait
for the return of the money from the trading partners.
The trading partners can get a very long term loan,
and the enterprise gets the money right away
on the fact of the realization of the commodity.
It is very convenient.
But all the convenience
should be assumed,
that the enterprise gets the money
from the factoring company,
and it should pay the factoring company
the same way as you pay the bank
a percentage of its use of credit funds.
And the factoring company
should pay a certain fee for the services it provides.
So, if you get financial funds
either from the bank
or from the factoring company,
all these funds are not free.
There is a certain fee for them.
And the bank percentage is even less than the factoring one.
Therefore, the enterprise always takes the bank loan
earlier than the factoring one.
The factoring is the use of money.
The bank provides the factoring company
with money,
and the factoring company provides it to you.
Thus, you pay the bank a percentage
and the factoring company a percentage
for the factoring company's participation in the operation.
Therefore, the factoring funds are more expensive
than the bank funds.
But we have already said that we have taken all the bank funds
that we could get.
The banks don't give us any more.
We take the factoring company.
We take the more expensive funds
for not having the cheaper ones.
But we have to pay for these funds anyway.
The question arises,
is any enterprise profitable
with the credit funds or the factoring funds?
The answer is simple, but we have to fixate it.
The fact is that there is a profitability of the business.
Any businessman gets a profit.
There is a norm of the profit he gets.
And the profitability of the business
should be higher than the percentage
that you pay for the factoring funds.
In this case, if this condition is fulfilled,
it is profitable for you to use the factoring funds.
Therefore, no matter how much you take the factoring funds,
the result will be profitable for you.
This delta that arises between the profitability of your business
and the percentage that you have to pay for the factoring funds
is the result of your financial operations.
And it brings additional income to the company.
But if a businessman has a business
that is less profitable than the percentage
that you have to pay to the bank
and the percentage that you have to pay to the bank
or the factoring company,
it is not profitable to use these funds.
Because you will pay more money for these funds
than you will get from using them in the business.
Therefore, before you go to the bank
or the factoring company,
you should look at the profitability of your business
and compare it with the percentage that you have to pay
for using the factoring funds.
And, accordingly, make the appropriate decision.
And at the end of our first question,
I would like to make one small but very interesting remark.
For small and medium-sized enterprises,
there is a unique feature.
It is so unique that it is a sin not to know about it.
The fact is that these enterprises can build
the system of current financial needs
in such a way that it has a negative meaning.
That is, to have more money flows
than the need in these financial funds.
Do you remember in our formula we said
that the current need is determined
by the need for reserves and debt.
And the minus of the reserve and credit debt.
Thus, if the credit debt exceeds the debt and reserves,
you get into a unique situation
when you, due to the business,
due to the situation in the market,
have borrowed more money
than you need to borrow from others.
Can you imagine?
You are in a situation when you work
exclusively with borrowed funds.
And you did not specially borrow them.
This is the situation in the market.
You work in a situation when you are credited.
And you are credited constantly.
For an indefinite period.
And in this situation you can be in for a very long time.
And the middle enterprises should strive to get into it.
When you are given more money with reserves,
than you need to make the production process.
And to give as a commodity credit to your customers.
An amazing situation.
And I am glad that the audience of this lecture is in such a state.